when you sit down
with a ruler considered carefully what
is before you and put a knife to your
throat if you are a man given to
appetite do not desire his delicacies
for they are deceptive food do not
overwork to be rich because of your own
understanding cease will you set your
eyes on that which is not for riches
certainly make themselves wings they fly
away like an eagle
toward heaven do not eat the bread of a
miser nor desire his delicacies for as
he thinks in his heart so is he eat and
drink he says to you but his heart is
not with you the morsel you have eaten
you will vomit up and waste your
pleasant words do not speak in the
hearing of a fool for he will despise
the wisdom of your words do not remove
the ancient landmark nor enter the
fields of the fatherless for their
Redeemer is mighty he will plead their
cause against you
[Music]
apply your heart to instruction and your
ears to words of knowledge do not
withhold correction from a child for if
you beat him with a rod he will not die
you shall beat him with a rod and
deliver his soul from hell my son
if your heart is wise my heart will
rejoice indeed I myself yes my inmost
being will rejoice when your lips speak
right things do not let your heart
envies sinners but be zealous for the
fear of the Lord all the day for surely
there is a Hereafter
and your hope will not be cut off
here my son and be wise and guide your
heart in the way do not mix with
wine-bibber x' or with gluttonous eaters
of meat for the drunkard and the glutton
will come to poverty and drowsiness will
close a man with rags listen to your
father who begot you and do not despise
your mother when she is old buy the
truth and do not sell it also wisdom and
instruction and understanding the father
of the righteous will greatly rejoice
and he who begets a wise child will
delight in him
let your father and your mother be glad
and let her who bore you rejoice my son
give me your heart and let your eyes
observe my ways for a harlot is a deep
pit and a seductress is an arrow well
she also lies in wait as for a victim
and increases the unfaithful among men
who has woe who has sorrow who has
contentions who has complaints who has
wounds without cause
who has redness of eyes those who linger
long at the wine those who go in search
of mixed wine do not look on the wine
when it is red when it sparkles in the
cup when it swirls around smoothly but
the last it bites like a serpent and
stings like a Viper
your eyes will see strange things and
your heart will utter perverse things
yes you will be like one who lies down
in the midst of the sea or like one who
lies at the top of the mast saying they
have struck me but I was not hurt they
have beaten me but I did not feel it
when shall I awake that I may seek
another drink